Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs and
to the m joined by Doctor Francesca Bela. She
is postdoctoral researcher in the er C Project Assembling
Life at the Center for Philosophy and the Sciences
in the Department of Philosophy, Classics, History, art and
Ideas at the University of Oslo. She is interested
basically in the complexity of the interactions between different
entities and in particular, she is fascinated by the
interface between chemistry and biology. And today we're going
to talk a little bit about Philosophy of Science
with the focus on biochemistry and we're going to
discuss what are functions, what are kinds, specifically biochemical
functions and kinds genes as well and some other
related topics. So, Doctor Bela, welcome to the show.
It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thank you for inviting me. It's a
huge pleasure for me to uh be part of
this show.
Thank you. So let's start perhaps with functions. I
mean, uh I uh I would like first to
ask you more generally in the context of science
and philosophy of science. What are functions?
Yes. Now, well, that's an excellent question. And I
would say that like in a nutshell, so if
we try to bring together all the different accounts
of functions, functions are special causal contributions, which can
give us like informations about the identity, the history
and the context relativity of the role that an
entity uh plays. So using a classic toy example,
we can take the art uh the heart is
a muscle that has the function to pump blood,
or at least this is one of its functions.
And uh the function of pumping blood is a
special causal role that the heart plays in the
physiological system. It tells us what is uh what
makes the heart a heart compared to other muscles
because it specifies what uh the heart is doing.
But it's also telling us that the heart has
been selected as a muscle to pump blood. So
as you can see the notion of functionality um
can inform us on a lot of different things.
Now, functions are also attributed to artifacts for instance.
And I think that the definition that I gave
that is that um functions are really special because
they contributions can work for something like a chair,
like we can use a chair to do different
things. Uh But what makes a chair, a chair
is that it has the function of allowing us
to sit on it. Uh And this uh um
yeah, and this kind of like allows us to,
to define the object. Uh Having said that. So
having provided this kind of general definition, I do
think that when we apply functionality to different types
of different kinds of objects, uh then we might
need specific account of functions. So in that sense,
I think that um after the first step of
providing like a general definition of functionality, uh we
can be quite pluralist uh about specific notions of
functionality uh for uh for, for different objects. So
I think that the way in which we ascribe
functions to artifacts such as a chair might be
different from the specific way in which we want
to ascribe functions to something like the heart or
any other trait. And that is different also from
other kinds of entities like uh molecules.
Mhm Yeah. So, so when it comes to functions,
it just came to my mind because for example,
when it comes to the heart and it pumping
blood, I mean, in that specific case and probably
others in our human bodies, are we talking specifically
about evolved functions? There is the functions that a
particular organ, for example, a particular biochemical molecule have
evolved to perform or can it also include other
types of uh I don't know secondary acquired functions,
for example.
Yeah. Yeah. Like this is an excellent question. I
think that probably different philosophers would give different answers
to this. Uh And there is no like unified
view, I would say that I am quite sympathetic
with the idea that in order to identify what
is special about functions or scholar contributions, we need
to bring in evolutionary history. So like the function
of the art is what it has been selected
for now, whether this just includes pumping blood, for
instance, for the art or whether it can include
also what are called like distal functions. Um I
don't have uh a strong argument for neither of
these views. I would say that generally, I'm quite
happy to ascribe functionality if we can identify a
form of evolutionary background. Uh But this doesn't necessarily
have to be like direct. Um And I think
that this is how we can bring in, for
instance, um evolutionary talk into ascribing functionality to molecules
because molecules are not the classic uh target of
evolution. Uh They, they are a bit different, it's
not like they, they present different features compared to,
for instance, traits or phenotypic traits in particular. Um
So, yeah, and that like compared to maybe other
philosophers, I'm a bit more loose in the fact
that what I think is interesting is a form
of general evolutionary context as that is helpful to
identify like which of the causal contributions are functions
and which are just causal contributions or roles that
the different rates can perform.
And when you talk about uh distal functions, which
is something you mentioned there very briefly. For example,
when it comes to the heart, since it pumps
blood, would the distal function perhaps be that it
also distributes oxygen through the body to the different
kinds of cells. You would that would that count
as a distal function?
Yeah, that would be a kind of like distal
function that is quite proximal as if we unpack
like the pumping blood. Uh THEN pumping blood is
useful for um yeah, for moving the oxygen. Another
like distal function can be for instance, the sound
that the heart make. So the fact that like,
uh for instance, this can tell us whether something
is alive or not or can be one of
the parameters that it can, that can be used.
Uh uh And yeah, and, and there are philosophers
diff like, differing opinions about whether, for instance, the
sound that the heart makes, um, is a function
or not. Uh Because somehow it's such as an
effect of what would be the, like some people
would call the proper function uh that, um that
maybe doesn't count as such, even if, for instance,
it can have a role in uh the interactions
that's like an animal or uh or even us
with other living beings.
Mhm. In that case, the sound would be like
what a by product of the heart pumping blood
and not exactly a function. Right? I mean, it's
not the function of the heart to produce sound.
The sound is simply a by-product of it.
Right. Exactly. And like, and then we can even
say that like the heart hasn't been selected because
it is an organ that makes a sound. Um
AND, and like an art like the heart as
a trade has been selected in a series of
um animals because um it pumps blood so it
allows for circulation.
Mhm. And we'll probably get into more of this
when we talk about biochemistry specifically. But since I
already asked you about evolved functions and also what
I called, I'm not sure if this is the,
this is the correct terminology, but I call them
acquired functions. For example, we know that across different
species, different animals, plants, et cetera, the same uh
biochemical mo molecules can be be present for different
or it can have different functions in different contexts.
So I mean, what would count there as an
evolved function, would it be the original function of
the molecule? And then when it acquires new functions
in more recently evolved uh organisms, for example, then
it would be a an acquired function or I
mean, ho how do you deal with it?
Yeah, excellent. But I think that uh one of
the core things about functionality is that or at
least in how I think about functionality is that
functionality is always context dependent. So we always need
to consider the function of something in a given
context. Um So let us take a concrete example.
Uh THAT is one of those that I have
studied myself. And we can take for instance, the
function of vitamin B 12. Um Vitamin B 12
as the function in humans or as many functions
in humans actually, uh but one of them is
to contribute to AIS. So um it intervenes in
this process that uh uh regards the renovation of
red blood cells. Now, uh this biochemical function is
quite specific to the presence of erythropoiesis. And to
the fact that like erythropoiesis in humans uh has
been selected in a way that um in a
way thanks to which vitamin B 12 can basically
display its function. However, vitamin B 12 is only
synthesized by bacteria and archaea of specific species. And
there it has a different function. Um MOSTLY an
an enzymatic function there as well. But of course,
it's not a function in in erythropoiesis because uh
bacteria and archaea don't have blood nor red blood
cells and so on. So, in that case, we
can notice that we have the same entity, which
is the vitamin B 12 uh in general in
all, in all of its vitamer. And this entity
display different biochemical function. Why? Because they contribute to
different biological processes which have been selected to uh
to operate differently. So I would say that for
instance, it doesn't make much sense or rather more
than doesn't make sense. It's not really informative for
instance to say that vitamin B 12 is a
function in living beings in general. Uh BECAUSE we
don't get like the specificity that we need. And
while instead, if it, it is more meaningful or
it is more informative to say vitamin B 12
as a function in bacteria and archaea because it
can act in a, as a co enzyme in
many different um physiological processes of those species. And
it has a function in erythropoiesis in humans and
other mammals. So we make it specific to the
process that has evolved. Um And in which the,
the vitamin displays its role
and then all of those different physiological processes it
participates in across different organisms are, all of them
are functions of that specific biomolecule,
right? Uh Yes, in a way. Um Yes.
And so let me just ask you one more
question before we get into kinds because it just
came to my mind when you mentioned the example
of the heart pumping blood. So let's say that,
for example, someone develops cancer. So when that happens,
of course, the blood also reaches the cancer and
sort of feeds it with nutrients with oxygen and
all of that, uh I mean, since it's sort
of an um what we would consider an abnormal
process to develop cancer, uh Could we also say
that uh in that specific case, one of the
functions of the heart is to feed the cancer
or not?
Yeah, excellent question. So I think that in this
case, and this is why bringing in evolutionary context
is very important in this case, we can say
that the heart is contributing to a dysfunctioning process,
which is the process of cancer application from the
perspective of the organism. Uh And in that case,
the heart is not doing what it has been
selected to do in a way that is like
the heart hasn't been selected to feed cancerous cells,
for instance, um like by providing oxygen, but the
heart has been selected to pump blood across the
organism. And then somehow what is this functioning in
itself? From the perspective of the organism? Of course,
uh is the cancer. Uh And this is, and,
and, and that's why I think that uh yeah,
bringing in evolution can really help because we can
say the same about, for instance, uh um the
role of vitamin B 12 in um erythropoiesis for
forms of blood cancer, for instance, like in that
case, of course, there is still the causal contribution
is not that vitamin B 12 stops uh intervening
we don't have uh unless there are like, for
instance, uh severe uh lack of vitamin B 12,
but that's a bit of a different case. Uh
But what happens is that it is the process
to which these molecules are contributing that is dysfunctioning.
Why? Because it's not doing what it has been
selected to do. So it uh it is, it
is behaving differently. And, and I think that this
is really a powerful tool that uh bringing in
evolutionary consideration to functionality f because it can allow
us to do this uh these distinctions between uh
these functions and, and functions,
right? So let's get into kinds then, of course,
we've probably already mentioned some biochemical kinds here. But
what are kinds more generally in science?
Yes. So it is of course, like an excellent
question um especially when we are talking about ascribing
functions to, to different kinds. And I guess that
we can take uh at at least a dual
answer to this kind of like minimal answer and
a more elaborated answer. And I think that like
the minimal answer is that well, kinds are just
types of things. So so we can like use
kind talk to just mean that while things are
clustered into different categories. Uh AND um and we
can distinguish them because they can be clustered into
different categories. And this is a kind of like
weak use of the of kind talk. I think
that in philosophy of science and in metaphysics of
science, in particular, the term kind is a bit
more loaded than, than type to. Uh AND it's
generally refers to the fact that we tend to
classify objects or processes into group of things and
these groups of things are kind. Now, these kinds
can at least be divided into being real or
natural kinds. Uh And here, I'm conflating the distinction
even if of course, there is a huge debate
on whether we we can do this. Um And
uh more conventional or um instrumental kinds. So we
can classify things into clusters that we think or
respond to real divisions in nature, or we can
classify things into cluster, which are just useful for
scientific purposes. Uh And, and then in that, we
don't really have a commitment into trying to, for
instance, understand whether there are real distinctions in nature.
And I think that classic examples also here is
that we can take different molecules of gold and
classify them under the kind of gold. And with
that, we want to say, well, there is some
such as at least the gold molecules which share
something in nature for which we cluster them together.
Or we can take for instance, the category vegetables
in nutrition uh which seems to be much more
of an instrumental kind. Why? Because we are clustering
together different things um because it is useful. Uh
BUT this distinction doesn't correspond to, for instance, a
botanical distinction uh as stuff like uh spinach or
tomatoes would classify as vegetables in nutrition. Uh But
their biological um classification is different. And uh technically,
tomatoes are a fruit uh even if we wouldn't
consider them as such uh and uh and, and
related. So I think that this is quite an
important uh contrasting category and I do think that
there are some kinds that fall in between. So
now I'm also working on the notion of investigative
kinds. So kinds that are good for investigation in
which we can use to try to unpack what's,
what's really going on. And I think that for
instance, the kind vitamin is there into the investigative
notion, uh and the kind gene as well, uh
which I know we can talk about later. It's
something that can go into that direction that is
it has been introduced as conventional or as instrumental.
So we don't want to have commitment in the
actual word about the existence of something such as
the gene. But the introduction of the term allowed
us to discover so many things to the point
that now at least maybe. So, I mean, I
would say that for instance, the molecular gene is,
is a natural kind. So it corresponds to something
existent.
Mhm Yeah. So we'll probably come back to the
investigative investigative kinds later when we talk about genes
then. But let me ask you when it comes
to natural or real kinds, how do we determine
that something is a natural kind? Are there specific
criteria?
Yeah. Yeah. So, um again, like extremely debated topic.
Um And I would say that um I, I
wouldn't want to commit on a definition that has
to be uh valid in, in all of these
cases. I don't find that, of course, we need
to do the empirical investigation also to corroborate our
theories. But generally, I need to say that uh
I am quite fond of a theory of natural
kinds that has been proposed by Mohammed Ali Khalidi.
And I think that his account is quite powerful
uh in that it allows it, it at least
gives us uh some tools to distinguish natural from
conventional kinds. And these are the fact that these
kinds present properties which are project. What does it
mean? It means that we can do prediction and
explain based on inferring the presence of a property
from one kind to one another. So the moment
in which we consider these properties that are associated
to the kind we are able to predict and
explain stuff about instances of the kind. Uh And
the fact that these kinds have a role in
our causal network. Now, this role is dual in
the sense that the essences of the kinds um
have a causal impact on the word because of
the properties they display. So they can enter into
causal relation. And uh also the properties of the
kinds are linked by causal connections. Uh So I
think that uh this this tool or the, yeah,
this conceptual tool is quite powerful to, to distinguish
kinds or rather conventional from natural kinds or at
least give us reason to investigate whether a kind
is natural. So they can also be seen as
a starting point but uh naturalness.
Mhm Does what we consider natural kinds depend on
the level of analysis we're using. So I was
thinking that for example, in biochemistry, we have, we
usually refer to molecules. But if we go down
one level and we're looking at it through the
lens of physics. Would the kinds there be the
elements or even the subatomic particles? How do we
approach that?
Yeah. Yeah. So I need to say that uh
I am quite generous in my kind ascription. So
I would say that there are all these types
of kinds. Uh I know that like other philosophers
like Thomas Taco that, that you interviewed and uh
and others would be, would have a much more
sparse account of natural kinds. They would say no,
like the only natural kinds are maybe like the
physical subatomic particles or if one wants to take
like a very bottom up approach, you know, the
only natural kind is the universe and then everything
guys is just a component. While I would say
that I'm personally quite generous, I think that uh
yes, it depends on the type of entity that
you are considering and that kinds can really be
clustered in a way that doesn't even have to
be hierarchical. Uh Like, I'm quite happy with like
cross cutting kinds uh or kinds that are like
in different, like at the same entity can present
different types of kinds as well. So as you
said, like if we take um even like a
complex molecule like water, then water can be kind
and then we can unpack it and we can
see that there is oxygen and hydrogen and then
we can unpack it and see that there are
protons, neurons and electrons uh and, and, and so
on and I personally don't have a problem with
that. So my, my, my ontology is quite busy
there. There are a lot of things.
Yeah. No, I was just asking because I mean,
if we want to be as reductive as possible,
there are people out there, philosophers of science, scientists
that would probably argue that the only real natural
kinds are the ones that we can find that
the physics level. And so things like subatomic particles
and, and stuff like that and all the rest
that we find above that level are not really
are not real kinds, I guess.
Yes. Yes. No, I don't like that. Um I
think that the word, like I need to say
that as a kind of rule of thumb, I
do find causality quite important. Like if something is
an important causal role, then we should take his
ontological profile at least seriously. Uh So we should
at least investigate um whether we, we have a
kind there. So uh yes,
and what uh to get into biochemistry specifically? What
are biochemical kinds then?
Yes. So, well, again, here I start from a
term that comes from the discipline biochemistry. But I
think that in my understanding of biochemical kinds, we
find all those molecules, ma molecules compounds that ever
all in um living systems. And that actually present
a combination of structural functional and evolutionary properties. So
this is how I understand them because um of
course, I I take that from the term biochemistry,
but I want to include also maybe kinds that
studied by structural biology uh by molecular biology. So
basically, like all those um chemical entities on the
one hand that display also these properties that are
relevant for life and for biological beings. So classic
examples are proteins which are of course one of
the main um the main cases, but I would
also include vitamins, carbohydrates, lipids, uh which are crucial
for membranes and the DNA and RN A which
are crucial for her heredity uh and also protein
synthesis. So these are all molecules that maybe like
in the different departments are studied by different people.
But they think that they share important properties and
uh my characterization of them is that uh linking
it. But what we were saying about kinds is
that in order to have these biochemical kinds as
I intend them, we need to have some chemical
structural properties that we need to identify. And the
investigation in itself of the notion of structure in
biochemistry is quite interesting because these molecules are macro
molecules most of the times. And so they don't
fit easily into the discussion of chemical structure in
the philosophy of chemistry literature because normally they focus
on stuff like uh either single elements which are
the most mostly discussed case study or um things
like water, which in a way are, is still
much simpler than something like a protein, for instance,
uh then they need to have a function. And
uh and this relates to the whole discussion on
like proteins functionality, but basically like it's this role
into biological processes. And this brings in evolutionary considerations
that is these molecules again, don't display random functions,
they display functions in processes that have been selected.
Um And they can have this causal contribution role.
So, and maybe even uh but this is really
something that I'm still trying to work out is
that we can maybe even put a constraint on
the fact that these molecules do have that should
be biosynthesis or there should be the possibility of
them being biosynthesis that is synthesized by organisms. Even
if of course, this now, especially with the new
tools that have just been awarded by the Nobel
Prize, for instance, in which we can predict new
molecules structure, design new molecules um for proteins. Uh
Maybe this criteria is a bit too strict. But
I think that still the fact that like these
molecules need to play a role in processes that
have been selected uh is important. So again, the
context is important.
And so let me just ask you when it
comes, when we're talking, for example, about proteins or
about lipids or about uh DNA, for example, uh
o of course, they have smaller components. They are
building blocks like in the case of proteins. We
have amino acids. In the case of lipids, we
have fatty acids. In the case of DNA, we
have N nucleotides. So would those be kinds or
how would you deal with the building the building
blocks there? What would you call them?
Yeah, I would say that they are definitely chemical
kind. Um So again, like given that I am
quite generous in my kind subscription, I think that
they are general, there are chemical kinds. We can
identify chemical structural properties, probably they can fit easily
into forms of micros structuralism, which is generally the
criteria applied for um for chemical kinds. Uh So
I think that uh yes, like they, they would
be. So I think that basically these components become
biochemical in the moment in which they are assembled
in the right way. So I think that that's
important and in the, and in the moment in
which they can display the functionality that they have.
So in the moment in which we can uh
yeah, think about the function that they display and
the role that they play in organisms uh that
have evolved.
Uh That's a very interesting point that you just
made there. So is it possible to identify exactly
at what point a molecule becomes a biomolecule or
when it's just an inorganic molecule, let's say,
yeah, I think that probably it's not easy to
identify the exact moment, but I would say that
the moment in which it plays a role in
a biological system, it becomes one. So I do
have this quite dynamic view of the interactions between
the so-called chemical and biological interfaces or chemical and
biological domains. Um And I think that, yeah, if
I would put it in a nutshell in a
kind of catchy way which is not super precise,
but maybe gives the idea is that a chemical
molecules become biomolecule. But yeah, or a biochemical in
the moment in which it plays a function in
an evolved system. Uh So there is this uh
there is this component I know that there are
counter examples like tricky cases. So for instance, what
about magnesium uh or lithium, they play important physiological
roles while we would still understand them osmotic chemical
uh entities. At the end, there are elements. Uh
And I think that there is like an interesting
case in which we have a chemical element or
a chemical kind that displays a biochemical function because
in the moment in which magnesium is contributing to
specific physiological property uh processes or even when they
say that like magnesium hates sleep. This is a
very like um yeah, kind of maybe a very
distal function because we're looking at a really an
overall organism thing. But this is one of these
cases in which we have chemical kinds like elements
that display a biochemical function. Why? Because they enter
into uh selected processes and they manifest like specific
contributions. Um AS yeah, II I don't think that
we can really be the kind of like police
there in like saying, oh you are biochemical, you
are chemical like all the time because I think
that a lot of analysis should be done case
by case. Uh But generally, there is this idea
that in the moment in which we find an
interaction uh in evolutionary processes, we we find something
biochemical and if we want to make it even
more strict, then we can say, well, not only
that, but also the fact that the processes have
been selected to interact with those molecules. So again,
context
uh so in that specific case, they would, we
would determine them as being biomolecules functionally and from
an evolutionary perspective as well, right? I mean, because
we can find, for example, lithium and other ions
and other molecules also in geological processes, for example,
in rocks and stuff like that. But in those
specific cases, since they are not performing a biological
or a physiological function, they are not biomolecules even
though they are exactly the same kinds of molecules.
Right? Yes, exactly. This is exactly what I would
say.
Uh And so uh le let me just ask
you because uh within the domain of proteins, we
have a very specific subcategory that is enzyme. So
how do we deal with them? Uh HOW do
you deal with them? Uh Do you say that
enzymes are also a kind or not?
Yes, I would say. So uh I would say
that like enzymes are also kind and like and
structural proteins are a different or like molecular motors
are different kinds. Uh That is, these are like
subcategories. And then again, given that I'm quite loose
and I'm happy with having like crosscut kinds. I'm
also happy for the same type of protein to
display different uh roles even at that level. So
one of my favorite examples are crystalline uh crystalline
are moonlighting proteins as they are called. Exactly because
they can display uh an enzymatic function in digestion
and the structural function inside. And uh they do
so basically by tweaking their ters structure a little
bit. So per se, they, they had the same
protein like they are classified as the same protein
mostly because uh they display the same primary and
tertiary structure uh to a great extent. But there
are differences like slight differences in the tertiary structure
which allow the molecules to perform different roles or
simply the inter the basically the surface of the
tertiary structure just gets slight modifications uh in a
way that then they can uh display different functions.
And by displaying different functions, we can classify them
as like enzymes or as structural proteins in the
different biological processes. So again, the fact that they
happen to be uh in processes that have, that
have a different evolutionary history, like the digestive process
and the side process uh allows us to identify
which pro which properties are relevant?
Mhm. But in biochemistry, since we are combining biology
with chemistry, do you distinguish between biological and chemical
functions? Is that something you do or not?
Well, so I think that well in biochemistry in
itself as a discipline, like I'm not a biochemist,
so probably uh my answer uh will just come
from me studying biochemistry. Uh But I don't think
that um there is a clear distinction between that.
I think that the notion of function is used
quite loosely and to mean different things in different
contexts. I do think that as a philosopher, for
instance, one of the useful thing that we can
do is to provide conceptual clarity by saying that
there are different notions of functionality at play according
to what we want to consider. So I think
that it is important to go um to distinguish
chemical functions from biochemical functions from biological functions because
these are going to tell us different information um
about the energy that we are considering that. So
chemical functions are quite loosely um applied in uh
in a description of functional groups, functional groups are
specific structural features of a chemical molecule uh or
compound or element which allow them to enter into
specific reactions. So it's basically what is telling us
uh the reactivity profile of a molecule. As you
can imagine if we take uh the molecules that
are normally considered in biochemistry, these molecules are massive,
they are very very big and they will have
loads of functional profiles in principle. Uh There will
be lots of different reactions in which the molecules
can enter. And it is why the moment in
which for instance, we want to consider the function
of vitamin B 12 in eroses or the function
of hemoglobin in binding and releasing oxygen. We are
not interested in all the functional profiles of the
macro molecules. We are interested in very specific ones.
We are interested in those parts of the molecules
and those chemical physical properties really which allow the
molecule to display the function in the given system.
And I think that for simpler molecules like for
instance, vitamin B 12, which at the end are
forms of cobalamin, then we can identify some functional
groups which are the specific ones that are able
to enter into the reactions relevant for a retro
pois. But if we consider molecules like proteins, then
not only we need to consider the chemical properties
of the molecule, but we also need to consider
the shape. So the ters structure is crucial because
again, here, it's interesting why we need to distinguish
chemical from biochemical functions. Because for instance, hemoglobin doesn't
only need to bind oxygen. The hemoglobin is to
release oxygen at the right time. So we need
to get this capacity um to bind the end
release oxygen, which is for which the the the
territory and then the quaternary structure uh is actually
crucial and then to this, we can add the
biological functionality, which I think is really the selected
effect your functionality I find is the most accepted
and successful uh account of functionality. And then for
that, we need evolutionary history. Uh And I think
that biological function ID can be applied differently to,
to different molecules uh because they can display a
more or less direct form of evolutionary history. So
again, taking examples, vitamin B 12 as a more
direct evolutionary history in the bacteria and archaea that
synthesize the molecule so that we can identify what
are the processes that have been selected to synthesize
the molecule in the organism while for the great
majority of mammals, but also algae. Uh Another species
which rely on, on, on vitamin B 12, we
need to consider a much bigger evolutionary history because
we need to get vitamin B 12 from those
bacterias that are synthesizing the molecule. And this happens
by a lot of different ecosystem interactions. And this
is of course different from the evolutionary history of
a protein that we synthesize such as hemoglobin. Um
BECAUSE in that case, we can identi and and
other proteins, we can identify a specific set of
genes or uh uh specific sequences which are encoding
for the protein. And for some of these proteins
is it's possible to have a direct evolutionary history.
Like we can track it, we can compare it.
There is a lot of really fascinating study on.
Um YEAH, comparing the different evolutionary history of proteins.
Uh And there we can apply biological functionality in
a different way because somehow it's more direct uh
so we can track it,
right? One very interesting thing that you mentioned there
are glossed over a little bit was the fact
that uh at a certain point you mentioned uh
tertiary structure, the tertiary structure of proteins. And I
mean, it's very interesting because at least in the
particular case of proteins, if I understand it correctly,
their function depends a lot on the way they
are structured, right? I mean, uh uh the uh
it, it, it sort the f their function sort
of derives at least to some extent from the
way they are structured physically.
Right? Yes. Yes, exactly. Um And this is uh
this is really fascinating uh because um the FF
folding can happen in many ways. So we move
from basically the result of the uh of DNA
expression to the test structure. This can happen in
many, many ways. Uh But somehow what is what
matters that is really the shape um because basically,
like it creates different surfaces that can then uh
interact differently in different contexts, which is why again,
like there is um that has been uh the
importance of uh for instance, the discoveries awarded by
the Nobel Prize are so important because they allow
us to go from primary to tertiary structure, which
is where the functionality happens
Mhm. And so let's talk then a little bit
about genes earlier at a certain point. You, I
think if I remember correctly, you talked about genes
as a sort of investigative kind. So te tell
us about that. What is, uh, gene? Exactly?
Yeah. So, um, I think that the genes are
a very fascinating notion because, um, they developed like
the kind of extension and intention of the gene,
the changed a lot, um through time. And I
think that it is quite important to specify which
type of gene we are talking about. So if
we are talking about a molecular gene or if
we are talking about a medallion gene, and at
which point in the history of molecular biology, we
are talking about genes because the term has been
really changing. Now, I would say that if we
want to make everyone happy, a common understanding of
the gene is the one of the molecular gene
and then the gene becomes a stretch or a
string uh often contiguous of DNA and RN A
that is encoding for the primary structure of a
protein or other functional RN A molecules. And this
is the kind of generally accepted definition, we also
find uh the definition of the Mendelian Gena, which
is uh which are these groups of actually stretches
of DNA which encode for a trade. And as
you can imagine, the scale of this is quite
different because in the molecular gene definition, we are
considering just the bits that are going to encode
for a protein, which of course is quite long,
but it's still way less complex than for instance,
the gene for the nose or for the heart
or for um or for other traits. So I
think that these are the two big notions that
we find in the literature. Uh I mostly worked
on the notion of the molecular gen as this
is really where a lot of the interactions uh
between uh uh chemistry and biology happen and between
life and chemical entities happen. Uh And I think
that the definition that I gave while it is
informative at like at the first stage is actually
quite inaccurate in the moment in which we consider
new discoveries, in particular, the discoveries of the last
40 years. Uh And what is called like the
post genomic revolution or a post genomic change um
in which thanks to the, the new discoveries that
we have made, we noticed that actually genes are
not, for instance, identical to conti stretches of DNA.
Uh And uh to this discovery and that like
actually, for instance, um polypeptide chains can be transcribed
by noncontiguous stretches of DNA that the same stretch
of DNA can encode for many different products. So
there is a lot of complexity there and uh
some of the reactions to these have been uh
eliminate, at least in a kind of ontological sense
that is, well, there is nothing like the gene,
the gene doesn't exist, we have DNA, we have
expression and these matters. Uh I don't walk that
route. Uh I think that actually what we can
do is that we can consider genes as temporal
entities. So this is quite, I know maybe a,
a kind of crazy idea, but I think that
it works because uh I think of genes as
um something that emerges or comes through uh expression.
So they exist in the moment in which they
are transcribed basically. Uh And if we take this
temporal notion of gene and this uh kind of
flexible notion of genes, then genes can become entities
that exist as realized by specific sequences in a
given moment in time. But in another moment in
time, the same sequences can realize or can constitute
actually a different gene which has a different function
because it encodes for a different protein or uh
yeah, molecular products.
Uh That's all very interesting. Uh And please correct
me if I'm wrong. But if I understand it
correctly, we don't have uh uh the, the entirety
of the information we need to produce a protein
in just the gene alone because in going from
the gene through the transcription to MRN A and
then translation through TRN A and then getting the
the protein itself, we go through several steps where
post transcription factors, for example, play a role, right?
I mean, so what I'm trying to say is
that uh when it comes to the information necessary
to produce a protein, it's not entirely in the
gene itself.
Right. Yeah. Yeah, that's, this is, this is very
true. And again, I think that uh the context
in which gene expression happen matters massively. Like, I
really love this definition from Griffiths and sts kala
dos that the genes are things that cells do
with their genome. Uh BECAUSE this gives the idea
of the fact that like the cellular context is
massively important for the determination of all of this
behavior and all of this uh reading. And then
of course, with that, all the factors around the
sequences which you mentioned again, like recently awarded discovery
of Macro RN A and the the role that
it has in uh uh in these processes, the
fact that like genes are regulated, the fact that
there are networks, uh all of these market ma
massively. So like genes are a highly contextual entities
in the sense that um they are really realized
by this very complex machinery, which is uh offered
first firstly by the cell. Uh And then, um
and then even by the, the whole organism matters.
And I think that this probably was one of
the most surprising thing about some of the research
projects. Uh FOR instance, the human genome project that
they were hoping that in the moment in which
you get the sequence, you will get all the
information that you need. Uh And this, of course,
and this has proven to be quite disappointing because
actually, it is the way in which you read
the sequence, the way in which the sequence is
transcribed, the whole interactions that happen in the cell
that for a lot of phenomena are, are really
important. This of course, doesn't mean that there aren't
specific cases in which actually having the sequences is
telling you everything you need. Like luckily for medicine,
we know that there are some diseases that are
caused by very specific sequences. And the fact that
we have this knowledge allows us to intervene. Uh
BUT generally for uh the great majority of the
other genes and for a lot of complex um
phenomena, the interaction is way more complicated than uh
just the realization of a sequence.
Mhm. Yeah, it's very interesting. So there's a lot,
if I understand it correctly, there's a lot of
context dependency here when it comes to genes and
uh the link between, for example, genes and traits
or genes and proteins. Right.
Yes. Yes, exactly. Um I, I do think that
there is um that context dependence is, is really
crucial for uh all of the biochemical stuff really.
So genes in particular are, are an important case.
But also for everything we talked about, I think
that context is crucial. Now, some philosophers I know
uh take context as a threat, as a threat
to naturalness or as a threat to reality. Like
if something is context dependent is like less existent.
Uh I don't endorse that. I think that first,
it is important to distinguish context dependency from discipline,
dependency. That is for instance, like it's not the
fact that I am a biologist or a chemist
that matters for my understanding for the gene, it
can influence my empirical study. So I can decide
to focus more on some properties rather than others.
Um But it is really like an epistemic distinction
or the main distinction. And this is really epistemic.
Uh And maybe that can actually matter for instance,
for uh uh naturalness or non naturalness or uh
kind. But I, I think that context dependence is
something different as this relates to the actual interactions
that happen in the systems that we are considering.
And um I don't consider that as a particular
threat also because I think that everything is actually
really context dependent. Uh BECAUSE every time we don't
consider context dependency, we are making an abstraction. So
we are getting rid of parts of the context
in which uh something exists, which can be really
useful for, for some specific purposes. Uh But then
I actually find that yeah, things really get to
be what they are because of the context they
are in and the relationships they are in matter
for their identity. And I think the genes are
a paradigmatic case, but also what we talked about
earlier, like lithium in a mountain or magnesium in
a mountain is going to be something different from
me, taking my magnesium before going to sleep because
I want to sleep better. I just say,
yeah, no, it's, it's really very interesting. And I
was thinking when you mentioned that there are people
out there who whenever we talk about context or
context dependency, they think that the things who are
context dependent are less real than things who are
not context dependent. Do you think that could be
because many the philosophers of science and even even
more so scientists themselves have this sort of substance
ontology? And uh I mean, if they adopted, for
example, a process ontology, then it would be easier
for them to understand processes themselves as being real
instead of uh substances, for example.
Uh Yeah, I think that there is definitely something
like that. I don't think that substance ontology necessarily
is uh against context, but I find that definitely
the focus on intrinsic properties is so I think
that there has been historically this um preference for
intrinsic properties. Like I think that one studies the
history of philosophy of Western philosophy uh in the
great majority of cases. Uh THIS has been the
case and of course, there is a value to
it. Why? Because intrinsic properties favor stability stabilities is
stability. So it's easier to identify, it's easier to
rely on. So there is this and and it
is quite useful. I do find that it's not
that the process of abstraction in which we focus
on what is stable are necessarily self defeating for
empirical or epistemic purposes. I just think that in
the moment in which we want to bring back
the entity into reality and we want to get
an overall characterization of what something is, then we
need to be open to consider relational level properties
as well and it it extrinsic properties and uh
then definitely something like a process ontology or even
forms of antique structural realism uh can be really
insightful um uh in uh in, in our understanding.
So I don't think that there is necessarily the
need to like get rid of objects or get
rid of substances. But I think that we need
to become a bit loser in the type of
properties that we think are relevant for these entities,
especially when we consider entities that are really at
the borders like biochemical entities or genes uh for
which the interactions matter,
right? Uh uh But because genes are so context
dependent and we also have or add post post
genomic discoveries, like for example, the fact that the
expression of genes is regulated. And so we have
epigenetics and then also, as we mentioned earlier, we
have a post transcription factors playing a role in
the kinds of proteins that are produced, et cetera.
Um Can we still consider genes natural kinds or
not?
Yeah. Yeah. Excellent question. I do think that like
molecular genes can still be considered natural kinds. Um
BUT we need to consider the relevant properties for
it. So we need to consider the fact that
genes are not simply structural entities. So they are
not simply specific strands of DNA or RN A
for, for some species. Uh The fact that genes
uh needs to have a functional provider, uh it
is very important and this brings in also the
evolutionary history. So those three properties that I mentioned
earlier about biochemical kinds. So the fact that biochemical
kinds need to have a structure and they need
to have a function and they need to have
an evolutionary history matters for our consideration of the
naturalness of the genes. I do find that like
genes are natural because they can be quite project.
So the moment in which we consider genes in
terms of their expression and we are able to
predict and explain a lot of things uh which
is similar for cases as I mentioned earlier in
which the stretch of DNA that realizes the gene
is quite stable. Uh But this is still possible
for like a lot of research. And also genes
display a core role in our causal structure in
the cells because they express the protein. So and
they encode the protein which in other, in other
very important molecules and this as a crucial causal
role.
Mhm So there's one last topic I would like
to ask you about and I think it's completely
unrelated to what we've been talking about up till
now. But I, I want to ask you because
I found it really interesting. Uh You've written on
the application of virtue ethics to the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. Could you tell us about that?
Yes. Yes. Uh So this is uh yeah, really
a a side project. II, I need to say
that um I think of myself as like a
philosopher that does mostly philosophy of science, but I
am interested in a lot of philosophical questions. So
I have a lot of, yeah, uh kind of
like side projects and side interests and uh I
guess it, those papers as for many of us
really came from the fact that we got hit
by this very, like very harsh reality. Uh And
especially for myself, I was uh stuck in uh
far away from home. I am originally from Italy.
Uh And as we know, like the north of
Italy in particular was really impacted by, by the
pandemic and a part of me felt that I
needed to do something about it, which I think
was what a lot of people felt. Uh And,
and, and my idea was like, OK, like there
is a lot of talk which seems to be
based on ethical schemes that again are quite rigid.
Uh And they don't consider the fact that like
a lot of our actions are done by individuals
in context. So I feel that probably there is
this social context which comes in again. Uh And
so I wanted to suggest a paper in which
if we bring in vir trades, which not only
focuses on the actions of the character of the
individual, but also as this flexibility regarding what we
can, what each individual can do in each context
compared to, for instance, a more indicating or a
more uh utilitarian ethics or consequentialist ethics um which
seems to be up at a much more like
a group level or either like at a principal
level. Uh I thought that uh yeah, exploring that
would provide a different angle to a lot of
the talk that especially in the UK, which is
not a surprise, but there was a lot of
like utilitarian mindset, like we need to think about
what is good for the majority, uh at least
at the beginning because then of course, the the
situation changed. Uh But there was a lot of,
a lot of like, OK, we need to think
about what is good for the majority, what is
going to maximize the outcome and then if something
is going to get loose or someone is going
to get loose in the way, whatever kind of
thing. Uh And that really surprised me in a
way or rather hit me personally. And I was
like, OK, we, we, we need to think about
these things from a different angle. I also found
that those type of talk in that context was
also taking away agency from all of us because
again, deciding for the majority is not something that
an individual can do unless you are a politician
or someone that is in the ruler position. While
instead deciding every day what I can do to
contribute to my situation, which is what virtually invited
to gives us more agency, more control. Um EVEN
in situations of legal control, but you are not
anymore um spectator of choices, but it can also
be quite empowering. So I think that those were
some of the motivations,
but in this particular case of the COVID-19 pandemic,
which virtues would you say are the most relevant
to consider here?
Yes, that's a good question. Um I do find
that generally like the virtue of prudence as it
is understood, which is basically trying to evaluate in
each circumstance, which virtues you should use uh was
probably the most relevant prudence is also the most
difficult virtue. Uh BECAUSE of course, it requires a
lot of um analysis and control. I also find
that forms of bravery, not in the sense of
uh bravery as, oh, I go outside and face
danger and uh I fight the virus because unfortunately,
we couldn't, we can't do that braver in the
sense of OK, I might sacrifice some parts of
my well being if this is going to help
someone else, if this is going to help someone
that is maybe more vulnerable than myself. So there
is this element of like, OK, maybe wearing a
mask is not pleasant, but if wearing a mask
can save someone or can at least contribute to
uh preventing that someone that is in a really
vulnerable position uh gets infected, then I can choose
as an individual to do. So. Um So uh
yeah, so probably like prudence, benevolence, uh courage or
like um being brave were definitely uh relevant virtues.
What about humility? Do you think that it would
also make sense as a virtue in the context
where perhaps we have to rely a lot on
what experts are saying?
Yeah, that's a very good point. So I think
that um humidity play a role, but I understand
that I think that we shouldn't go with the
kind of like proper understanding of humidity in that
case. Uh I think we should really like consider
the definition of intellectual humility that is provided in
a lot of the literature on the topic, which
is the fact that we need to be able
to evaluate, when is the moment to step back
and when is the moment to come forward? So
when is the moment in which I don't have
the skills to for instance, understand the technicality of
a problem. But I do have the skills to
understand maybe the social component of it. And I
actually think that probably the lack uh of good
intellectual humidity um has also been problematic on all
sides because for instance, the fact that we were
following maybe only the information that were coming from
the sciences, which is very important because they tell
us the mechanism, thanks to which the virus replicates
and spreads, they weren't though informed by, for instance,
studies in sociology, psychology. OK. How do we deal
with loneliness? Uh And somehow the social sciences got
pushed back a lot. And that was also a
case in which somehow there wasn't much intellectual humidity,
for instance, at the public uh at the policy
making level, because some sciences were really, really put
very high and others were put very low and
not considered uh and probably both at the individual
level in which I can bring in my skills.
And maybe I don't know if I, if I
am a teacher, uh I might need to learn
from scientists how the virus spread. But then as
a teacher, I might know what is good for
my students and the fact that maybe they need
specific interactions. And so we need to find ways
to give students those interactions. Um AND also the
policy making level. So bringing in a form of
a good intellectual humidity in which different sciences and
different perspectives coming in on different domains.
Mhm Yeah, because uh I mean mentioning humility, perhaps
there was also not much humility, at least on
the part of certain types of experts, like for
example, uh doctors, epidemiologists and so on. Uh IMMUNOLOGISTS
as well because uh when it comes to, as
you said, there are the social aspects of how
we dealt with the COVID-19 pandemic, things like loneliness,
isolation and stuff like that. Maybe people who could
have played an important role there, like psychologists, sociologists
were pushed aside and the stage was given more
to, uh as I said, doctors, epidemiologists, immunologists and
people like that. Right.
Yeah. Yeah. No. Exactly. Which I think that's something
I said, I don't think its underlying enough is
that um like these situations are always complex and
so they might require complex solutions. So the fact
that we bring in psychologists and sociologists, for instance,
on trying to understand the impact that loneliness can
have, especially on vulnerable categories like kids or teenagers.
Uh But and everyone doesn't meet doesn't imply that
then the fact that it is still true that
the virus spreads in many ways is pushed away.
Like the the ideal thing is really to find
an interaction between the two, which is of course,
super difficult and in a situation of emergency that
we faced and especially the Western world hasn't faced
anything like that in the longest period of time.
Uh So of course, it makes sense that we
didn't have the tools to, to see that clearly.
But somehow the contrast wasn't really to put it
simply like, oh let us lock everybody up or
let us just let the virus spread because people
need sociality like probably the ideal solution was trying
to find a common ground between the two. And
in, in the, in this, I do find that
uh probably spreading education and empowering the individuals in
making choices uh could have been really useful because
I also feel that giving this stage to just
the experts that were talking mostly in experts term,
just made people feel extraordinarily even more frustrated and
isolated because they didn't have the tools to understand
what was going on. And, and that was a
problem, not of the people that didn't know or
didn't understand. That's a problem of those that communicate
such knowledge. And that's again, something else in which
for instance, the role of sociologists and psychologists and
maybe, and maybe even philosophers for us could have
been helpful because I think that people should be,
should have the tools to understand stuff that matters
to their life. So to this, like I do
have a project with a colleague of mine Simone
Pican, like the right to science and the right
to have access to science and why it is
important to remove epistemic barriers. And it is particularly
important for contexts like the COVID pandemic vaccination, but
even climate change in which people are required to
take action and the action is action that they
need to take. But on the basis of scientific
knowledge that no one is really explaining them and
this is really not empowering and we, we should
actually, yeah, flip that and, and, and explain people
what's going on so that they can become even
better agents. And maybe in this, I am naive,
but I do believe in the power of education.
So with that in mind, with uh your belief
in the power of education, do you think that
this kind of work and people reflecting a little
bit on what individuals themselves can do and how
to develop certain kinds of virtues? Do you think
that I in a possible future pandemic? Uh THE
uh this kind of thing could be taught to
people and to, I, I mean, e even in
schools and other places like that and to help
people, Children, adults deal with that uh with what's
happening in such a kind of context?
Yeah, I do think so. Uh And I think
that this is really something that all of us
that work in education uh that have an interest
in science, communication and knowledge, communication via all sorts
of tools like podcast interviews. Uh PUBLIC speech, I
uh public writing, I think that this is really
something that, that we have to work on and
that uh and that we need to communicate. I
think this is really important and unfortunately, the fact
that there is a lot of focus on, I
mean, of course, we need the technical research as
well to investigate the work. But I do think
that it is important to bring this knowledge everywhere.
Uh BECAUSE I do think that this can make
us better agents or at least, can have, can
have an impact in making us better agents or
giving at least the capacity to choose in a
more informed way which type of agents we want
to be and how we want to interact.
Great. So just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Yes. Well, um I do have a website uh
which is just my name Francesca bela.com. Uh And
I keep my website up to date so that
you can find what I'm doing where I'm going,
which talks I do. Uh And there is also
a section on uh public outreach which is called
articles and media and um that you can find
in my pop article, pop pop articles. I try
also to be quite active philosophically on Twitter or
now ex uh which um yeah, with the end
of Fran Lai. So you can also find uh
what I'm doing and which talks I'm going to
my conferences and everything that is philosophy related there.
So, thank you.
Great. So I'm leaving some links to that in
the description of the interview and Doctor Bela. Thank
you so much for the great conversation. It's been
really informative and fun. So, thank you.
Thank
you.
Thank you really for me as well, really a
pleasure and an honor. And thanks to everyone that
has been listening to this.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten. B are no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ
Conor Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine
in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field,
Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus
and H her meal and Lain Jung Y and
the K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S
Friends. David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi Na Me, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall,
Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Gilon Cortez
Solis Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loi Georgio Theophano Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then
spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul
Barnabas Radis. Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris
to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard
N Cortes Dixon Bendik Mueller, Thomas Rumble, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick
Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi,
Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.